First draft: why you should write a CLI tool for your organisation (#1)
surminus/usrbintop: content/blog/why-you-should-write-a-cli-tool-for-your-org.md

---
title: "Why You Should Write a CLI Tool for Your Organisation"
date: 2020-06-12T16:18:26+01:00

> ---

Author: Add tags

At my current place of work, I am (currently) the only Operations & Platform
focused engineer, in a technology team of around 30 people who are either
Software Engineers, Technical Leads and Technical Architects.

> It's my job to ensure that everyone who is focused on Software Development

Author: ```suggestion
It is my job to ensure that engineers who are focused on Software Development
```

> (essentially all of the above), are able to achieve everything they need to,

Author: ```suggestion
(all of the above), are able to achieve everything they need to,
```

without feeling too much drag from our internal tooling.

> A crude metaphor might be like Software Engineers being like Formula 1 drivers;

Author: ```suggestion
If Software Engineers are the drivers of Formula 1 cars
```

> and I have to make sure the car isn't slowing them down.

Author: ```suggestion
then I have to make sure that the car itself isn't slowing them down.
```

I had dabbled with writing a command-line tool in a previous position, and when

> I joined my current place one of the first things I did was write a

Author: ```suggestion
I started here, one of the first things I did was write a
```

> command-line tool to replace some homespun scripts used by most of the Tech

Author: ```suggestion
command-line tool to replace homespun scripts used by most of the Tech
```

Team.

It also coincided with an interest in learning [Go](https://golang.org/), and

> so I used [Cobra](https://github.com/spf13/cobra) to help me get started.

Author: ```suggestion
so I used [Cobra](https://github.com/spf13/cobra) to get me started.
```

## Replacing homespun scripts

> It's not unusual to find developers using a variety of homespun scripts to

Author: ```suggestion
It's not unusual to find developers using multiple homespun scripts to
```

interact with environments. For example, we had one script that listed the
servers in our environment; another script which started an SSH session to one

> of these servers; and finally, another script which started a Rails or MySQL

Author: ```suggestion
of these servers; and finally, a script which started a Rails or MySQL
```

console on one of these servers.

Each of these scripts had a slightly different name, and they existed in the
repo alongside our monolithic application.

I decided that if I could roll all of this functionality into a single tool, it
would be much easier for new starters to pick up a single tool, and use
"--help" if they got stuck, rather than having to root around in our
documentation on how to perform a particular function.

In the end, everytime I came across a homespun script, I incorporated it into
the command-line tool.

I worked hard to ensure it was easier to use my tool than any of the scripts,
in the hope everyone would choose to migrate across.

While I had very positive feedback, in the end we had to delete the old scripts

> so we weren't supporting two sets of tools.

Author: ```suggestion
so we weren't supporting two sets of tools, and forced the remaining engineers to use the new shiny tool instead.
```

This taught me that most engineers will not explore alternatives until it
directly impacts them. This is because most people are focused on the work, not

> the tools, and highlighted than having engineers focused on tools _as the

Author: ```suggestion
the tools, and this highlighted that having engineers focused on tools _as the
```

> work_, is absolutely vital to reducing that drag.

Author: ```suggestion
work itself_, is absolutely vital to reducing that drag.
```

## Powering up

Even before I started writing the tool, I had a vision that every interaction
we have with our development environment should have a command-line alter ego.

Everytime I interacted with an environment in the "traditional" way, I wondered
how I could convert this into the CLI.

I am an evangalist for automation, and am always mystified by engineers who are
quite willing to travel the long route round something when it could be so
easily simplified by code.

If I were able to introduce everyone to a simpler, easier way of doing things,
then people would willingly move to using the CLI.

Probably my greatest example of introducing this convenience, was to add the "ci" command.

This performed a simple function:

* In the current working directory, discover the name of the Git repository
   and branch (I used the [go-git library](https://github.com/go-git/go-git)
   for this)
* Craft a link to the branch in CI

> * Open a browser to the job

Author: ```suggestion
* Open a browser to the job (using the [open](https://github.com/skratchdot/open-golang) library)
```

I also included a couple of subcommands, "list" and "console" that output the

> history of jobs and console output of the last job respectively.

Author: ```suggestion
history of jobs and console output of the job respectively.
```

that it made engineers lives much easier by saving that mental workload of
having to find your branch in our CI tool.

The thing that struck me most was how surprised engineers were by something so
simple making their lives easier.

## To infinity, and beyond

With this momentum, everytime I got annoyed at having to do something, I added
it to the tool, and eventually it became the de-facto way to perform tasks.

Some example commands were:

* "alerts": lists the current triggered monitors in
  [Datadog](https://www.datadoghq.com/), and the ability to mute them
* "app": installs dependencies, downloads and imports data snapshots, an
  alternative to [Foreman](https://github.com/ddollar/foreman)
* "deploy": trigger a deployment of the application, including deploying a
  branch in a test environment
* "docker": small wrapper to help working with our images, particularly with
  [Amazon ECR](https://aws.amazon.com/ecr/)
* "scale": scale AWS auto scaling groups in and out
* "secrets": interacts with [AWS SSM Parameter
  Store](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/systems-manager/latest/userguide/systems-manager-parameter-store.html)
  to add, rotate and delete secrets

## Feedback is key

> Probably one of the tougher things I found was receiving feedback. I would

Author: ```suggestion
Probably one of the tougher things I found was receiving feedback.
```

> often find that if something didn't quite work the way someone expected the

Author: ```suggestion
Often, if something didn't quite work the way someone expected it to on the first go,
```

> first time, they would fall back to the older manual way, and I would never

Author: ```suggestion
they would fall back to the "traditional" way, and I would never
```

find out about it to put in a fix.

> I also made many of the decisions in the implementation of the tool, and

Author: ```suggestion
I also made many of the decisions by myself in the implementation of the tool, and
```

> appreciate any feedback anyone provides about how they interact with a tool,

Author: ```suggestion
appreciated any feedback anyone provides about how they interact with a tool,
```

and what doesn't make sense.

This is still an issue I struggle with, and I think the power dynamic for
internal tooling sometimes makes this difficult. Engineers are happy to use
tools that work; but they're often hyper aware of other engineers workloads, so
are less prone to raise bugs or UX feedback.

One of other things I struggle with is advertising the capability of the tool.
I often have to sneak into Slack threads and say "Hey! Did you know our tool

> can do that?"

Author: ```suggestion
can do this?"
```

## What is the value to an organisation as a whole?

I am a strong believer that coming together to write a CLI tool has many
benefits beyond the convenience of automating away labourious tasks.

Firstly, and probably I think is the biggest benefit, is that working on
internal tooling in this way gives you a massive insight to the everyday
processes and Continuous Tasks that every engineer engages in.

This is key to understanding exactly what small things are taking precious
minutes away from each engineer everyday, and it also may bubble up some larger

> organisation processes that should be changed in the process.

Author: ```suggestion
organisational processes that should be changed in the process.
```

For example, we may have a deloyment process that involves going into a web
browser and clicking "deploy". We could move this into the CLI by writing
something that interacts with the CI tool API, but perhaps implementing
Continuous Deployment would be a more impactful change.

The next benefit is that it can be a project with minimal impact and immediate
feedback. I think this is why I love writing CLI tools. Engineers have a place

> where they can write code for fun, without the risk, and with the potential of

Author: ```suggestion
where they can write code for fun, without risk, and with the potential of
```

> being able to unlock additional productivity for their colleagues.

Author: ```suggestion
being able to unlock productivity for their colleagues.
```

It's also a place where everyone can come together and work on the same thing;
and perhaps it'll help you understand how your colleagues work in one team
compared to your own.

Last but not least, it is great for new starters to hit the ground running. One
of the most intimidating things when starting at a new place is getting to
grips with all the internal tooling, and being given access to 20 odd SaaS
accounts (a modern horror story).

Being able to install a tool, which is powerful enough to get you on your way,
is a wonderful way to start the journey.

It is my hope that I get to experience this at some point in the future, so

> please everyone, start to write your own command-line tool!

Author: Maybe an ending comment about contacting me on twitter?
